Modern Molecular Simulations using Extended-Lagrangian Approaches
Cameron F. Abrams

Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations are increasingly powerful tools to study molecular-level phenomena and their links to macroscopic properties.  Fundamentally, MD propagates atomic positions and velocities by numerical integration of equations of motion subject to forces representing interatomic interactions.  Unfortunately, even with present day computational power, it is nearly impossible to directly observe phenomena that have natural timescales of greater than a few microseconds or length scales greater than a few tens of nanometers using MD.  This is because the ceaseless thermal agitation resolved by MD only very rarely and unpredictably rectifies itself along productive directions in some more macroscopically meaningful variable space.  Our group is devoted to overcoming this issue with novel methods that provide access to these rare events by explicitly representing these variable spaces as participants in the simulations via a so-called extended-Lagrangian framework. In this talk, I will provide a retrospective discussion of several modern extended-Lagrangian methods our group has contributed to in the study of protein conformational changes, and ligand binding and transport.  These include Temperature-Accelerated MD (TAMD), on-the-fly parameterization (OTFP), the climbing string method in collective variables (cSMCV), and Markovian Milestoning, among others.  Example applications showcased will include detailed enzyme kinetics and ion channel transport mechanisms.  I will conclude with perspectives on the most persistent challenges for such molecular simulation methods and some outstanding problems yet to be solved.

SPEAKER BIOGRAPHY

Cameron F. Abrams is the Bartlett '81 -- Barry '81 Professor and the Department Head of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Drexel University in Philadelphia.  He received a BS in Chemical Engineering from North Carolina State University in 1995 and a PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of California—Berkeley in 2000.  After two years of postdoctoral training at the Max-Planck-Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz, Germany, he joined the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Drexel University in Philadelphia as an Assistant Professor in 2002.  Abrams’ primary research expertise lies in molecular simulations and new simulation method development, with applications ranging from new materials and fluids to drug design.  Abrams is the recipient of an ONR Young Investigator Award, an NSF CAREER Award, and was the 2015 Impact Award Winner in the Computational Molecular Sciences and Engineering Forum of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers.  In additional to novel molecular simulation methods, Abrams’ research interests include high-performance materials, protein-related kinetics and thermodynamics, and HIV-1 entry inhibitor design.
