Graduate Studies in the Sciences and Engineering: Opportunities in the United States
Cameron F. Abrams

Are you interested in pursuing a career in research in the sciences or engineering?  Are you curious about opportunities in the United States to earn a PhD?  In this talk, I will provide an overview of the culture of graduate education in the sciences and engineering in the United States.  I will discuss ways of learning about graduate programs, how to decide where to apply (and whether or not you have to pay for it), how to make your application as competitive as possible, and how to decide among multiple offers.  I will also describe common aspects of life in the US as a graduate student, including where to live, how much you earn, and what kind of non-academic activities are available.  As an example, I will describe the PhD program in Chemical and Biological Engineering at Drexel University to give a detailed view of how a program selects its students.  There will be plenty of time for questions.

SPEAKER BIOGRAPHY

Cameron F. Abrams is the Bartlett '81 -- Barry '81 Professor and the Department Head of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Drexel University in Philadelphia.  He has almost 22 years of experience as a faculty member and has mentored 14 PhD students and 10 post-docs, and he has evaluated several hundred PhD applicants.  He received a BS in Chemical Engineering from North Carolina State University in 1995 and a PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of California—Berkeley in 2000.  After two years of postdoctoral training at the Max-Planck-Institute for Polymer Research in Mainz, Germany, he joined the Department of Chemical and Biological Engineering at Drexel University in Philadelphia as an Assistant Professor in 2002.  Abrams’ primary research expertise lies in molecular simulations and new simulation method development, with applications ranging from new materials and fluids to drug design.  Abrams is the recipient of an ONR Young Investigator Award, an NSF CAREER Award, and was the 2015 Impact Award Winner in the Computational Molecular Sciences and Engineering Forum of the American Institute of Chemical Engineers.
