

So you are interested in coming the US to do a PhD, in chemistry, physics, chemical engineering, or something similar.

First, some things you should know about the process:
1. One typically applies to a PhD "program", which may be under a "department" (a department can have one or more PhD programs), which is part of a "college" (a "college" typically has several departments), which is part of a "university" (made of several "colleges" or "schools").  Faculty who may advise PhD students on their research are typically affiliated with departments.
2. Each program has a dedicated official who leads the program admissions committee that evaluates that program's applications.  These officials are usually professors with service roles like "program advisor" or "graduate advisor".  It is a good idea to identify these people in programs you want to apply to.
3. Applicants typically choose programs based on their overall discipline and the availability of research projects under faculty advisors in the program.  Be aware that faculty who can advise PhD students in a program need not have their primary appointment in the program or that program's department.  You may in fact be admitted to a program and select an advisor who is NOT in that program, though this kind of thing is not universal. 
4. The program primarily determines what major courses you take, what courses you TA, and when your exams take place. Your advisor determines your research project, and potentially what elective courses you take.
5. Many Universities require application fees of between US$20 and US$100 dollars, but many programs waive those fees.  Do not be afraid to ask if a program can waive the fee  (Drexel does this, for example.). A University "releases" applications to "programs" for evaluation once their "fee" is paid, or waived. 
6. Programs have to evaluate many more applications than there are positions available, but they must also strategize on how many offers to make to fit the number of available positions.  Sometimes programs have to "guess" this number based on pending grant applications.  Sometimes an application is rejected for seemingly arbitrary reasons having nothing to do with the quality of the applicant.
7. Programs typically begin evaluating applicants late in the Fall terms (before December) and make offers as early as Dec 1 and all the way until March or April of the next year.  Getting applications in early in this process is always a good idea.  
8. Programs may contact applicants for "pre-interviews" before making offers.  Sometimes these will be conducted by individual faculty who are personally interested in the applicant joining their research group. Being responsive to inquiries from programs regarding your application is therefore a good idea.  Even if you are not interested any more, a simple "thanks but no thanks" is a polite thing to do.
9. If a program makes you an offer, you will typically have two weeks to respond.  This can be very stressful!  If you receive an offer while you are still waiting to hear back from another program, you may try asking for an extension, but elite programs with lots of applicants will typically not grant one.  Do not reject an offer merely because you are waiting for one from a "better" program.
10. Most programs (or their universities) have resources specifically for helping non-US PhD students acclimate to the US, find housing, and navigate immigration (you will be put on a J1 visa).  Universities very much want to help non-US PhD students come to the US and be successful!

When it comes to preparing your application, here are some useful recommendations:
1. Remember to try to submit in October or November of your final year, if possible.
2. You will need to report your score on a TOEFL exam, although this is not usually used to discriminate among applicants (a better TOEFL score alone does not make one a better applicant; it is more like a minimum requirement).
3. Your personal statement is important, and you should put real time into writing it.  Describe what motivates you to pursue a PhD, what research topics you are particularly interested in, and most importantly, which professors in the program you are applying to look the most interesting to you.  Keep it under one page if you can, and don't worry if English is not your first language.  Do not let ChatGPT or some such write your statement.  Do get guidance and mentorship from professors at your home institution if possible.
4. When submitting an application, you typically provide names and contact information for three or more potential recommenders, and the application system then automatically reaches out to them to request their letters of recommendation.  Always be sure to ask whether someone is willing to be a recommender for you. Take the time to speak with your recommenders about your motivations and interest, where you are thinking of applying, and make sure they have many good things to say about you.   
5. A productive research experience as an undergraduate is probably the single most important element of a highly competitive application (since most applicants will have good grades and strong recommendations).  It can also compensate for (ahem) less than stellar grades. A letter from a professor who supervised you in a research activity and/or teaching activity is especially valuable.

When it comes to deciding where to apply, here are some more useful recommendations:
1.  Look broadly.  There are a lot of opportunities at any of the roughly 150 "R1" research universities, including some of the best (Berkeley, MIT, Stanford, etc.) and many, many others.  Elite institutions are very, very competitive, and they reject most of their applicants.  Unless they have a faculty member with experience in Argentina and/or Latin America who knows the Argentine higher ed system, they will likely view an applicant from Argentina somewhat risky compared to a similarly well-trained US, Chinese, or Indian applicant.
2. Speak with your professors, especially if they have any experience in the US or know any US professors.  Get their advice on where to apply and how to weigh various factors.
3. Take advantage of ways to contact programs. Many run online "open-houses".  These can be your chance to get a quick overview of a department's research programs, and to learn who the program advisors are that run the application evaluations.
4. Many programs allow professors to advise students from other programs. This means that you should apply to a program that matches both your undergraduate training and your research interests, while being open to having a mentor who is not primarily appointed in that program, but instead has a "courtesy" appointment or affiliation that allows them to advise PhD students.
5. Be organized.  Make a database of institutions you would like to apply to and keep track of deadlines, letters of recommendation requests, program advisors, potential mentors, and decision deadlines.
6. Be honest with yourself, but not unreasonably limiting, about where geographically you would like to live in the US.  The US is a big place with a lot of cultural diversity (really).  Universities can be found tightly packed in large metropolitan areas (like Drexel is in the northeastern US) or in remote small towns (like Penn State in State College, PA, or University of Illinois in Urbana).  They can be in places where it is basically sunny all the time (University of Arizona in Tuscon) or very seasonal with hot summers and cold, cold winters (Northwestern U. in Chicago or U. Michigan in Ann Arbor).  They can be close to the ocean (Atlantic (U. Rhode Island) or Pacific (UCSB)) or smack in the middle of the country (U. Nebraska).  They can be close to great skiing (U. of Utah), hiking (UC Berkeley), mountain biking (U. Colorado, Boulder), and other fun stuff.
7. Reaching out directly to potential research advisors is generally not a good idea -- I get dozens of these kinds of contacts daily and usually delete them without reading them.  If you want to make a personal connection it works best if someone who knows both you and the potential advisor makes a connection.
8.  If you are put on a waiting list, do not be offended.  Remember, a lot of these decisions are arbitrary.  Being on the waiting list is much better than a rejection.  Don't let it keep you from accepting an outright offer, though.  But you can often apply gentle pressure to a program whose wait list you're on to get you off the wait list if you show that you have a competitive offer.

Congratulations!  You have accepted an offer!  What is next?
1. Now is a great time to reach out to prospective research advisors!  The sooner you let them know you are interested the better informed they will be when it comes time to decide whether or not to admit you to their group.  You may be directly admitted to a group, or you may be part of a cohort that first rotates through a few groups before deciding which group to join.
2.  Make sure you graduate! :)

Finally, to make some of these recommendations a bit more concrete, I'd like to use my own institution, Drexel University, and my own program, Chemical and Biological Engineering (CBE) as examples.
1. Drexel is an R1 institution with strong research programs in engineering and medicine.
2. We are located in the city of Philadelphia, the 7th largest metro area in the US, about an hour from NYC and two hours from Washington, DC.  Philadelphia has excellent public transit.  It aslo has strong Latin American cultural influences.
3. In Drexel CBE, about half our PhD students are non-citizens, with many from India and Iran, and relatively few from Latin America (which is why I am talking to you).
4. Drexel CBE waives all PhD application fees.
5. Drexel CBE has strong research programs in electrochemistry, materials, alternative energy technologies, molecular theory and simulations, and emerging strengths in polymer science and immunotherapies.  We have 12 tenure-track faculty all running research groups.  We typically on-board cohorts of between three and 10 PhD students each Fall, and it is never enough!
6. To earn a PhD with an advisor in Drexel CBE, you can apply to and be admitted to a different program at Drexel, e.g., chemistry, materials, physics, biochemistry, biomedical engineering, and others.   You don't have to be a chemical engineer.